=encoding utf-8


=head1 lua-resty-mlcache


[!L<CI|https://github.com/thibaultcha/lua-resty-mlcache/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg>](https://github.com/thibaultcha/lua-resty-mlcache/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

Fast and automated layered caching for OpenResty.

This library can be manipulated as a key/value store caching scalar Lua types
and tables, combining the power of the [lua_shared_dict] API and
[lua-resty-lrucache], which results in an extremely performant and flexible
caching solution.

Features:


=over


=item *

Caching and negative caching with TTLs.

=item *

Built-in mutex via [lua-resty-lock] to prevent dog-pile effects to your
database/backend on cache misses.

=item *

Built-in inter-worker communication to propagate cache invalidations
and allow workers to update their L1 (lua-resty-lrucache) caches upon changes
(C<set()>, C<delete()>).

=item *

Support for split hits and misses caching queues.

=item *

Multiple isolated instances can be created to hold various types of data
while relying on the I<same> C<lua_shared_dict> L2 cache.


=back

Illustration of the various caching levels built into this library:


    ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
    │ Nginx                                           │
    │       ┌───────────┐ ┌───────────┐ ┌───────────┐ │
    │       │worker     │ │worker     │ │worker     │ │
    │ L1    │           │ │           │ │           │ │
    │       │ Lua cache │ │ Lua cache │ │ Lua cache │ │
    │       └───────────┘ └───────────┘ └───────────┘ │
    │             │             │             │       │
    │             ▼             ▼             ▼       │
    │       ┌───────────────────────────────────────┐ │
    │       │                                       │ │
    │ L2    │           lua_shared_dict             │ │
    │       │                                       │ │
    │       └───────────────────────────────────────┘ │
    │                           │ mutex               │
    │                           ▼                     │
    │                  ┌──────────────────┐           │
    │                  │     callback     │           │
    │                  └────────┬─────────┘           │
    └───────────────────────────┼─────────────────────┘
                                │
      L3                        │   I/O fetch
                                ▼
    
                       Database, API, DNS, Disk, any I/O...

The cache level hierarchy is:

=over


=item *

B<L1>: Least-Recently-Used Lua VM cache using [lua-resty-lrucache].
Provides the fastest lookup if populated, and avoids exhausting the workers'
Lua VM memory.

=item *

B<L2>: C<lua_shared_dict> memory zone shared by all workers. This level
is only accessed if L1 was a miss, and prevents workers from requesting the
L3 cache.

=item *

B<L3>: a custom function that will only be run by a single worker
to avoid the dog-pile effect on your database/backend
(via [lua-resty-lock]). Values fetched via L3 will be set to the L2 cache
for other workers to retrieve.


=back

This library has been presented at B<OpenResty Con 2018>.  See the
L<Resources> section for a recording of the talk.


=head1 Synopsis



    # nginx.conf
    
    http {
        # you do not need to configure the following line when you
        # use LuaRocks or opm.
        lua_package_path "/path/to/lua-resty-mlcache/lib/?.lua;;";
    
        # 'on' already is the default for this directive. If 'off', the L1 cache
        # will be inefective since the Lua VM will be re-created for every
        # request. This is fine during development, but ensure production is 'on'.
        lua_code_cache on;
    
        lua_shared_dict cache_dict 1m;
    
        init_by_lua_block {
            local mlcache = require "resty.mlcache"
    
            local cache, err = mlcache.new("my_cache", "cache_dict", {
                lru_size = 500,    -- size of the L1 (Lua VM) cache
                ttl      = 3600,   -- 1h ttl for hits
                neg_ttl  = 30,     -- 30s ttl for misses
            })
            if err then
    
            end
    
            -- we put our instance in the global table for brevity in
            -- this example, but prefer an upvalue to one of your modules
            -- as recommended by ngx_lua
            _G.cache = cache
        }
    
        server {
            listen 8080;
    
            location / {
                content_by_lua_block {
                    local function callback(username)
                        -- this only runs *once* until the key expires, so
                        -- do expensive operations like connecting to a remote
                        -- backend here. i.e: call a MySQL server in this callback
                        return db:get_user(username) -- { name = "John Doe", email = "john@example.com" }
                    end
    
                    -- this call will try L1 and L2 before running the callback (L3)
                    -- the returned value will then be stored in L2 and L1
                    -- for the next request.
                    local user, err = cache:get("my_key", nil, callback, "jdoe")
    
                    ngx.say(user.name) -- "John Doe"
                }
            }
        }
    }




=head1 Requirements



=over


=item *

OpenResty E<gt>= C<1.11.2.2>

=over


=item *

ngx_lua

=item *

lua-resty-lrucache

=item *

lua-resty-lock


=back


=back

Tests matrix results:

| OpenResty   | Compatibility
|------------:|:--------------------|
| E<lt>           | not tested
| C<1.11.2.x>  | :heavy_check_mark:
| C<1.13.6.x>  | :heavy_check_mark:
| C<1.15.8.x>  | :heavy_check_mark:
| C<1.17.8.x>  | :heavy_check_mark:
| C<1.19.3.x>  | :heavy_check_mark:
| C<1.19.9.x>  | :heavy_check_mark:
| E<gt>           | not tested




=head1 Installation


With L<LuaRocks|https://luarocks.org/>:


    $ luarocks install lua-resty-mlcache

Or via L<opm|https://github.com/openresty/opm>:


    $ opm get thibaultcha/lua-resty-mlcache

Or manually:

Once you have a local copy of this module's C<lib/> directory, add it to your
C<LUA_PATH> (or C<lua_package_path> directive for OpenResty):


    /path/to/lib/?.lua;




=head1 Methods



=head2 new

B<syntax:> C<cache, err = mlcache.new(name, shm, opts?)>

Create a new mlcache instance. If failed, returns C<nil> and a string
describing the error.

The first argument C<name> is an arbitrary name of your choosing for this cache,
and must be a string. Each mlcache instance namespaces the values it holds
according to its name, so several instances with the same name will
share the same data.

The second argument C<shm> is the name of the C<lua_shared_dict> shared memory
zone. Several instances of mlcache can use the same shm (values will be
namespaced).

The third argument C<opts> is optional. If provided, it must be a table
holding the desired options for this instance. The possible options are:


=over


=item *

C<lru_size>: a number defining the size of the underlying L1 cache
(lua-resty-lrucache instance). This size is the maximal number of items
that the L1 cache can hold.
B<Default:> C<100>.

=item *

C<ttl>: a number specifying the expiration time period of the cached
values. The unit is seconds, but accepts fractional number parts, like
C<0.3>. A C<ttl> of C<0> means the cached values will never expire.
B<Default:> C<30>.

=item *

C<neg_ttl>: a number specifying the expiration time period of the cached
misses (when the L3 callback returns C<nil>). The unit is seconds, but
accepts fractional number parts, like C<0.3>. A C<neg_ttl> of C<0> means the
cached misses will never expire.
B<Default:> C<5>.

=item *

C<resurrect_ttl>: I<optional> number. When specified, the mlcache instance will
attempt to resurrect stale values when the L3 callback returns C<nil, err>
(soft errors). More details are available for this option in the
L<get()> section. The unit is seconds, but accepts fractional number
parts, like C<0.3>.

=item *

C<lru>: I<optional>. A lua-resty-lrucache instance of your choosing. If
specified, mlcache will not instantiate an LRU. One can use this value to use
the C<resty.lrucache.pureffi> implementation of lua-resty-lrucache if desired.

=item *

C<shm_set_tries>: the number of tries for the lua_shared_dict C<set()>
operation. When the C<lua_shared_dict> is full, it attempts to free up to 30
items from its queue. When the value being set is much larger than the freed
space, this option allows mlcache to retry the operation (and free more slots)
until the maximum number of tries is reached or enough memory was freed for
the value to fit.
B<Default>: C<3>.

=item *

C<shm_miss>: I<optional> string. The name of a C<lua_shared_dict>. When
specified, misses (callbacks returning C<nil>) will be cached in this separate
C<lua_shared_dict>. This is useful to ensure that a large number of cache
misses (e.g. triggered by malicious clients) does not evict too many cached
items (hits) from the C<lua_shared_dict> specified in C<shm>.

=item *

C<shm_locks>: I<optional> string. The name of a C<lua_shared_dict>. When
specified, lua-resty-lock will use this shared dict to store its locks. This
option can help reducing cache churning: when the L2 cache (shm) is full,
every insertion (such as locks created by concurrent accesses triggering L3
callbacks) purges the oldest 30 accessed items. These purged items are most
likely to be previously (and valuable) cached values. By isolating locks in a
separate shared dict, workloads experiencing cache churning can mitigate this
effect.

=item *

C<resty_lock_opts>: I<optional> table. Options for [lua-resty-lock] instances.
When mlcache runs the L3 callback, it uses lua-resty-lock to ensure that a
single worker runs the provided callback.

=item *

C<ipc_shm>: I<optional> string. If you wish to use L<set()>,
L<delete()>, or L<purge()>, you must provide an IPC
(Inter-Process Communication) mechanism for workers to synchronize and
invalidate their L1 caches. This module bundles an "off-the-shelf" IPC
library, and you can enable it by specifying a dedicated C<lua_shared_dict> in
this option. Several mlcache instances can use the same shared dict (events
will be namespaced), but no other actor than mlcache should tamper with it.

=item *

C<ipc>: I<optional> table. Like the above C<ipc_shm> option, but lets you use
the IPC library of your choice to propagate inter-worker events.

=item *

C<l1_serializer>: I<optional> function. Its signature and accepted values are
documented under the L<get()> method, along with an example. If
specified, this function will be called each time a value is promoted from the
L2 cache into the L1 (worker Lua VM). This function can perform arbitrary
serialization of the cached item to transform it into any Lua object I<before>
storing it into the L1 cache. It can thus avoid your application from
having to repeat such transformations on every request, such as creating
tables, cdata objects, loading new Lua code, etc...


=back

Example:


    local mlcache = require "resty.mlcache"
    
    local cache, err = mlcache.new("my_cache", "cache_shared_dict", {
        lru_size = 1000, -- hold up to 1000 items in the L1 cache (Lua VM)
        ttl      = 3600, -- caches scalar types and tables for 1h
        neg_ttl  = 60    -- caches nil values for 60s
    })
    if not cache then
        error("could not create mlcache: " .. err)
    end

You can create several mlcache instances relying on the same underlying
C<lua_shared_dict> shared memory zone:


    local mlcache = require "mlcache"
    
    local cache_1 = mlcache.new("cache_1", "cache_shared_dict", { lru_size = 100 })
    local cache_2 = mlcache.new("cache_2", "cache_shared_dict", { lru_size = 1e5 })

In the above example, C<cache_1> is ideal for holding a few, very large values.
C<cache_2> can be used to hold a large number of small values. Both instances
will rely on the same shm: C<lua_shared_dict cache_shared_dict 2048m;>. Even if
you use identical keys in both caches, they will not conflict with each other
since they each have a different namespace.

This other example instantiates an mlcache using the bundled IPC module for
inter-worker invalidation events (so we can use L<set()>,
L<delete()>, and L<purge()>):


    local mlcache = require "resty.mlcache"
    
    local cache, err = mlcache.new("my_cache_with_ipc", "cache_shared_dict", {
        lru_size = 1000,
        ipc_shm = "ipc_shared_dict"
    })

B<Note:> for the L1 cache to be effective, ensure that
L<lua_code_cache|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#lua_code_cache>
is enabled (which is the default). If you turn off this directive during
development, mlcache will work, but L1 caching will be ineffective since a new
Lua VM will be created for every request.




=head2 get

B<syntax:> C<value, err, hit_level = cache:get(key, opts?, callback?, ...)>

Perform a cache lookup. This is the primary and most efficient method of this
module. A typical pattern is to I<not> call L<set()>, and let L<get()>
perform all the work.

When this method succeeds, it returns C<value> and no error. I<>Because C<nil>
values from the L3 callback can be cached (i.e. "negative caching"), C<value> can
be nil albeit already cached. Hence, one must rely on the second return value
C<err> to determine if this method succeeded or notI<>.

The third return value is a number which is set if no error was encountered.
It indicated the level at which the value was fetched: C<1> for L1, C<2> for L2,
and C<3> for L3.

If an error is encountered, this method returns C<nil> plus a string describing
the error.

The first argument C<key> is a string. Each value must be stored under a unique
key.

The second argument C<opts> is optional. If provided, it must be a table holding
the desired options for this key. These options will supersede the instance's
options:


=over


=item *

C<ttl>: a number specifying the expiration time period of the cached
values. The unit is seconds, but accepts fractional number parts, like
C<0.3>. A C<ttl> of C<0> means the cached values will never expire.
B<Default:> inherited from the instance.

=item *

C<neg_ttl>: a number specifying the expiration time period of the cached
misses (when the L3 callback returns C<nil>). The unit is seconds, but
accepts fractional number parts, like C<0.3>. A C<neg_ttl> of C<0> means the
cached misses will never expire.
B<Default:> inherited from the instance.

=item *

C<resurrect_ttl>: I<optional> number. When specified, C<get()> will attempt to
resurrect stale values when errors are encountered. Errors returned by the L3
callback (C<nil, err>) are considered to be failures to fetch/refresh a value.
When such return values from the callback are seen by C<get()>, and if the
stale value is still in memory, then C<get()> will resurrect the stale value
for C<resurrect_ttl> seconds. The error returned by C<get()> will be logged at
the WARN level, but I<not> returned to the caller. Finally, the C<hit_level>
return value will be C<4> to signify that the served item is stale. When
C<resurrect_ttl> is reached, C<get()> will once again attempt to run the
callback. If by then, the callback returns an error again, the value is
resurrected once again, and so on. If the callback succeeds, the value is
refreshed and not marked as stale anymore. Due to current limitations within
the LRU cache module, C<hit_level> will be C<1> when stale values are promoted
to the L1 cache and retrieved from there. Lua errors thrown by the
callback I<do not> trigger a resurrect, and are returned by C<get()> as usual
(C<nil, err>). When several workers time out while waiting for the worker
running the callback (e.g. because the datastore is timing out), then users
of this option will see a slight difference compared to the traditional
behavior of C<get()>. Instead of returning C<nil, err> (indicating a lock
timeout), C<get()> will return the stale value (if available), no error, and
C<hit_level> will be C<4>. However, the value will not be resurrected (since
another worker is still running the callback). The unit for this option is
seconds, but it accepts fractional number parts, like C<0.3>. This option
B<must> be greater than C<0>, to prevent stale values from being cached
indefinitely.
B<Default:> inherited from the instance.

=item *

C<shm_set_tries>: the number of tries for the lua_shared_dict C<set()>
operation. When the C<lua_shared_dict> is full, it attempts to free up to 30
items from its queue. When the value being set is much larger than the freed
space, this option allows mlcache to retry the operation (and free more slots)
until the maximum number of tries is reached or enough memory was freed for
the value to fit.
B<Default:> inherited from the instance.

=item *

C<l1_serializer>: I<optional> function. Its signature and accepted values are
documented under the L<get()> method, along with an example. If
specified, this function will be called each time a value is promoted from the
L2 cache into the L1 (worker Lua VM). This function can perform arbitrary
serialization of the cached item to transform it into any Lua object I<before>
storing it into the L1 cache. It can thus avoid your application from
having to repeat such transformations on every request, such as creating
tables, cdata objects, loading new Lua code, etc...
B<Default:> inherited from the instance.


=back

The third argument C<callback> is optional. If provided, it must be a function
whose signature and return values are documented in the following example:


    -- arg1, arg2, and arg3 are arguments forwarded to the callback from the
    -- `get()` variadic arguments, like so:
    -- cache:get(key, opts, callback, arg1, arg2, arg3)
    
    local function callback(arg1, arg2, arg3)
        -- I/O lookup logic
        -- ...
    
        -- value: the value to cache (Lua scalar or table)
        -- err: if not `nil`, will abort get(), which will return `value` and `err`
        -- ttl: override ttl for this value
        --      If returned as `ttl >= 0`, it will override the instance
        --      (or option) `ttl` or `neg_ttl`.
        --      If returned as `ttl < 0`, `value` will be returned by get(),
        --      but not cached. This return value will be ignored if not a number.
        return value, err, ttl
    end

The provided C<callback> function is allowed to throw Lua errors as it runs in
protected mode. Such errors thrown from the callback will be returned as strings
in the second return value C<err>.

If C<callback> is not provided, C<get()> will still lookup the requested key in
the L1 and L2 caches and return it if found. In the case when no value is found
in the cache B<and> no callback is provided, C<get()> will return `nil, nil,
-1`, where -1 signifies a B<cache miss> (no value). This is not to be confused
with return values such as C<nil, nil, 1>, where 1 signifies a I<>negative cached
itemI<> found in L1 (cached C<nil>).


    local value, err, hit_lvl = cache:get("key")
    if value == nil then
        if hit_lvl == -1 then
            -- miss (no value)
        end
    
        -- negative hit (cached `nil`)
    end

When provided a callback, C<get()> follows the below logic:


=over


=item 1.

query the L1 cache (lua-resty-lrucache instance). This cache lives in the
Lua VM, and as such, it is the most efficient one to query.

=over


=item 1.

if the L1 cache has the value, return it.

=item 2.

if the L1 cache does not have the value (L1 miss), continue.

=back


=item 2.

query the L2 cache (C<lua_shared_dict> memory zone). This cache is
shared by all workers, and is almost as efficient as the L1 cache. It
however requires serialization of stored Lua tables.

=over


=item 1.

if the L2 cache has the value, return it.

=over


=item 1.

if C<l1_serializer> is set, run it, and promote the resulting value
in the L1 cache.

=item 2.

if not, directly promote the value as-is in the L1 cache.

=back


=item 2.

if the L2 cache does not have the value (L2 miss), continue.

=back


=item 3.

create a [lua-resty-lock], and ensures that a single worker will run the
callback (other workers trying to access the same value will wait).

=item 4.

a single worker runs the L3 callback (e.g. performs a database query)

=over


=item 1.

the callback succeeds and returns a value: the value is set in the
L2 cache, and then in the L1 cache (as-is by default, or as returned by
C<l1_serializer> if specified).

=item 2.

the callback failed and returned C<nil, err>:
a. if C<resurrect_ttl> is specified, and if the stale value is still
available, resurrect it in the L2 cache and promote it to the L1.
b. otherwise, C<get()> returns C<nil, err>.

=back


=item 5.

other workers that were trying to access the same value but were waiting
are unlocked and read the value from the L2 cache (they do not run the L3
callback) and return it.


=back

When not provided a callback, C<get()> will only execute steps 1. and 2.

Here is a complete example usage:


    local mlcache = require "mlcache"
    
    local cache, err = mlcache.new("my_cache", "cache_shared_dict", {
        lru_size = 1000,
        ttl      = 3600,
        neg_ttl  = 60
    })
    
    local function fetch_user(user_id)
        local user, err = db:query_user(user_id)
        if err then
            -- in this case, get() will return `nil` + `err`
            return nil, err
        end
    
        return user -- table or nil
    end
    
    local user_id = 3
    
    local user, err = cache:get("users:" .. user_id, nil, fetch_user, user_id)
    if err then
        ngx.log(ngx.ERR, "could not retrieve user: ", err)
        return
    end
    
    -- `user` could be a table, but could also be `nil` (does not exist)
    -- regardless, it will be cached and subsequent calls to get() will
    -- return the cached value, for up to `ttl` or `neg_ttl`.
    if user then
        ngx.say("user exists: ", user.name)
    else
        ngx.say("user does not exists")
    end

This second example is similar to the one above, but here we apply some
transformation to the retrieved C<user> record before caching it via the
C<l1_serializer> callback:


    -- Our l1_serializer, called when a value is promoted from L2 to L1
    --
    -- Its signature receives a single argument: the item as returned from
    -- an L2 hit. Therefore, this argument can never be `nil`. The result will be
    -- kept in the L1 cache, but it cannot be `nil`.
    --
    -- This function can return `nil` and a string describing an error, which
    -- will bubble up to the caller of `get()`. It also runs in protected mode
    -- and will report any Lua error.
    local function load_code(user_row)
        if user_row.custom_code ~= nil then
            local f, err = loadstring(user_row.raw_lua_code)
            if not f then
                -- in this case, nothing will be stored in the cache (as if the L3
                -- callback failed)
                return nil, "failed to compile custom code: " .. err
            end
    
            user_row.f = f
        end
    
        return user_row
    end
    
    local user, err = cache:get("users:" .. user_id,
                                { l1_serializer = load_code },
                                fetch_user, user_id)
    if err then
         ngx.log(ngx.ERR, "could not retrieve user: ", err)
         return
    end
    
    -- now we can call a function that was already loaded once, upon entering
    -- the L1 cache (Lua VM)
    user.f()




=head2 get_bulk

B<syntax>: C<res, err = cache:get_bulk(bulk, opts?)>

Performs several L<get()> lookups at once (in bulk). Any of these lookups
requiring an L3 callback call will be executed concurrently, in a pool of
L<ngx.thread|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#ngxthreadspawn>.

The first argument C<bulk> is a table containing C<n> operations.

The second argument C<opts> is optional. If provided, it must be a table holding
the options for this bulk lookup. The possible options are:


=over


=item *

C<concurrency>: a number greater than C<0>. Specifies the number of threads
that will concurrently execute the L3 callbacks for this bulk lookup. A
concurrency of C<3> with 6 callbacks to run means than each thread will
execute 2 callbacks. A concurrency of C<1> with 6 callbacks means than a
single thread will execute all 6 callbacks. With a concurrency of C<6> and 1
callback, a single thread will run the callback.
B<Default>: C<3>.


=back

Upon success, this method returns C<res>, a table containing the results of
each lookup, and no error.

Upon failure, this method returns C<nil> plus a string describing the error.

All lookup operations performed by this method will fully integrate into other
operations being concurrently performed by other methods and Nginx workers
(e.g. L1/L2 hits/misses storage, L3 callback mutex, etc...).

The C<bulk> argument is a table that must have a particular layout (documented
in the below example). It can be built manually, or via the
L<new_bulk()> helper method.

Similarly, the C<res> table also has a particular layout of its own. It can be
iterated upon manually, or via the L<each_bulk_res> iterator
helper.

Example:


    local mlcache = require "mlcache"
    
    local cache, err = mlcache.new("my_cache", "cache_shared_dict")
    
    cache:get("key_c", nil, function() return nil end)
    
    local res, err = cache:get_bulk({
      -- bulk layout:
      -- key     opts          L3 callback                    callback argument
    
        "key_a", { ttl = 60 }, function() return "hello" end, nil,
        "key_b", nil,          function() return "world" end, nil,
        "key_c", nil,          function() return "bye" end,   nil,
        n = 3 -- specify the number of operations
    }, { concurrency = 3 })
    if err then
         ngx.log(ngx.ERR, "could not execute bulk lookup: ", err)
         return
    end
    
    -- res layout:
    -- data, "err", hit_lvl }
    
    for i = 1, res.n, 3 do
        local data = res[i]
        local err = res[i + 1]
        local hit_lvl = res[i + 2]
    
        if not err then
            ngx.say("data: ", data, ", hit_lvl: ", hit_lvl)
        end
    end

The above example would produce the following output:


    data: hello, hit_lvl: 3
    data: world, hit_lvl: 3
    data: nil, hit_lvl: 1

Note that since C<key_c> was already in the cache, the callback returning
C<"bye"> was never run, since C<get_bulk()> retrieved the value from L1, as
indicated by the C<hit_lvl> value.

B<Note:> unlike L<get()>, this method only allows specifying a single
argument to each lookup's callback.




=head2 new_bulk

B<syntax>: C<bulk = mlcache.new_bulk(n_lookups?)>

Creates a table holding lookup operations for the L<get_bulk()>
function. It is not required to use this function to construct a bulk lookup
table, but it provides a nice abstraction.

The first and only argument C<n_lookups> is optional, and if specified, is a
number hinting the amount of lookups this bulk will eventually contain so that
the underlying table is pre-allocated for optimization purposes.

This function returns a table C<bulk>, which contains no lookup operations yet.
Lookups are added to a C<bulk> table by invoking `bulk:add(key, opts?, cb,
arg?)`:


    local mlcache = require "mlcache"
    
    local cache, err = mlcache.new("my_cache", "cache_shared_dict")
    
    local bulk = mlcache.new_bulk(3)
    
    bulk:add("key_a", { ttl = 60 }, function(n) return n * n, 42)
    bulk:add("key_b", nil, function(str) return str end, "hello")
    bulk:add("key_c", nil, function() return nil end)
    
    local res, err = cache:get_bulk(bulk)




=head2 each_bulk_res

B<syntax>: C<iter, res, i = mlcache.each_bulk_res(res)>

Provides an abstraction to iterate over a L<get_bulk()> C<res> return
table. It is not required to use this method to iterate over a C<res> table, but
it provides a nice abstraction.

This method can be invoked as a Lua iterator:


    local mlcache = require "mlcache"
    
    local cache, err = mlcache.new("my_cache", "cache_shared_dict")
    
    local res, err = cache:get_bulk(bulk)
    
    for i, data, err, hit_lvl in mlcache.each_bulk_res(res) do
        if not err then
            ngx.say("lookup ", i, ": ", data)
        end
    end




=head2 peek

B<syntax:> C<ttl, err, value = cache:peek(key, stale?)>

Peek into the L2 (C<lua_shared_dict>) cache.

The first argument C<key> is a string which is the key to lookup in the cache.

The second argument C<stale> is optional. If C<true>, then C<peek()> will consider
stale values as cached values. If not provided, C<peek()> will consider stale
values, as if they were not in the cache

This method returns C<nil> and a string describing the error upon failure.

If there is no value for the queried C<key>, it returns C<nil> and no error.

If there is a value for the queried C<key>, it returns a number indicating the
remaining TTL of the cached value (in seconds) and no error. If the value for
C<key> has expired but is still in the L2 cache, returned TTL value will be
negative. Finally, the third returned value in that case will be the cached
value itself, for convenience.

This method is useful when you want to determine if a value is cached. A value
stored in the L2 cache is considered cached regardless of whether or not it is
also set in the L1 cache of the worker. That is because the L1 cache is
considered volatile (as its size unit is a number of slots), and the L2 cache is
still several orders of magnitude faster than the L3 callback anyway.

As its only intent is to take a "peek" into the cache to determine its warmth
for a given value, C<peek()> does not count as a query like L<get()>, and
does not promote the value to the L1 cache.

Example:


    local mlcache = require "mlcache"
    
    local cache = mlcache.new("my_cache", "cache_shared_dict")
    
    local ttl, err, value = cache:peek("key")
    if err then
        ngx.log(ngx.ERR, "could not peek cache: ", err)
        return
    end
    
    ngx.say(ttl)   -- nil because `key` has no value yet
    ngx.say(value) -- nil
    
    -- cache the value
    
    cache:get("key", { ttl = 5 }, function() return "some value" end)
    
    -- wait 2 seconds
    
    ngx.sleep(2)
    
    local ttl, err, value = cache:peek("key")
    if err then
        ngx.log(ngx.ERR, "could not peek cache: ", err)
        return
    end
    
    ngx.say(ttl)   -- 3
    ngx.say(value) -- "some value"

B<Note:> since mlcache C<2.5.0>, it is also possible to call L<get()>
without a callback function in order to "query" the cache. Unlike C<peek()>, a
C<get()> call with no callback I<will> promote the value to the L1 cache, and
I<will not> return its TTL.




=head2 set

B<syntax:> C<ok, err = cache:set(key, opts?, value)>

Unconditionally set a value in the L2 cache and broadcasts an event to other
workers so they can refresh the value from their L1 cache.

The first argument C<key> is a string, and is the key under which to store the
value.

The second argument C<opts> is optional, and if provided, is identical to the
one of L<get()>.

The third argument C<value> is the value to cache, similar to the return value
of the L3 callback. Just like the callback's return value, it must be a Lua
scalar, a table, or C<nil>. If a C<l1_serializer> is provided either from the
constructor or in the C<opts> argument, it will be called with C<value> if
C<value> is not C<nil>.

On success, the first return value will be C<true>.

On failure, this method returns C<nil> and a string describing the error.

B<Note:> by its nature, C<set()> requires that other instances of mlcache (from
other workers) refresh their L1 cache. If C<set()> is called from a single
worker, other workers' mlcache instances bearing the same C<name> must call
L<update()> before their cache be requested during the next request, to
make sure they refreshed their L1 cache.

B<Note bis:> It is generally considered inefficient to call C<set()> on a hot
code path (such as in a request being served by OpenResty). Instead, one should
rely on L<get()> and its built-in mutex in the L3 callback. C<set()> is
better suited when called occasionally from a single worker, for example upon a
particular event that triggers a cached value to be updated. Once C<set()>
updates the L2 cache with the fresh value, other workers will rely on
L<update()> to poll the invalidation event and invalidate their L1
cache, which will make them fetch the (fresh) value in L2.

B<See:> L<update()>




=head2 delete

B<syntax:> C<ok, err = cache:delete(key)>

Delete a value in the L2 cache and publish an event to other workers so they
can evict the value from their L1 cache.

The first and only argument C<key> is the string at which the value is stored.

On success, the first return value will be C<true>.

On failure, this method returns C<nil> and a string describing the error.

B<Note:> by its nature, C<delete()> requires that other instances of mlcache
(from other workers) refresh their L1 cache. If C<delete()> is called from a
single worker, other workers' mlcache instances bearing the same C<name> must
call L<update()> before their cache be requested during the next
request, to make sure they refreshed their L1 cache.

B<See:> L<update()>




=head2 purge

B<syntax:> C<ok, err = cache:purge(flush_expired?)>

Purge the content of the cache, in both the L1 and L2 levels. Then publishes
an event to other workers so they can purge their L1 cache as well.

This method recycles the lua-resty-lrucache instance, and calls
L<ngx.shared.DICT:flush_all|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#ngxshareddictflush_all>
, so it can be rather expensive.

The first and only argument C<flush_expired> is optional, but if given C<true>,
this method will also call
L<ngx.shared.DICT:flush_expired|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#ngxshareddictflush_expired>
(with no arguments). This is useful to release memory claimed by the L2 (shm)
cache if needed.

On success, the first return value will be C<true>.

On failure, this method returns C<nil> and a string describing the error.

B<Note:> it is not possible to call C<purge()> when using a custom LRU cache in
OpenResty 1.13.6.1 and below. This limitation does not apply for OpenResty
1.13.6.2 and above.

B<Note:> by its nature, C<purge()> requires that other instances of mlcache
(from other workers) refresh their L1 cache. If C<purge()> is called from a
single worker, other workers' mlcache instances bearing the same C<name> must
call L<update()> before their cache be requested during the next
request, to make sure they refreshed their L1 cache.

B<See:> L<update()>




=head2 update

B<syntax:> C<ok, err = cache:update(timeout?)>

Poll and execute pending cache invalidation events published by other workers.

The L<set()>, L<delete()>, and L<purge()> methods require
that other instances of mlcache (from other workers) refresh their L1 cache.
Since OpenResty currently has no built-in mechanism for inter-worker
communication, this module bundles an "off-the-shelf" IPC library to propagate
inter-worker events. If the bundled IPC library is used, the C<lua_shared_dict>
specified in the C<ipc_shm> option B<must not> be used by other actors than
mlcache itself.

This method allows a worker to update its L1 cache (by purging values
considered stale due to an other worker calling C<set()>, C<delete()>, or
C<purge()>) before processing a request.

This method accepts a C<timeout> argument whose unit is seconds and which
defaults to C<0.3> (300ms). The update operation will timeout if it isn't done
when this threshold in reached. This avoids C<update()> from staying on the CPU
too long in case there are too many events to process. In an eventually
consistent system, additional events can wait for the next call to be processed.

A typical design pattern is to call C<update()> B<only once> before each
request processing. This allows your hot code paths to perform a single shm
access in the best case scenario: no invalidation events were received, all
C<get()> calls will hit in the L1 cache. Only on a worst case scenario (C<n>
values were evicted by another worker) will C<get()> access the L2 or L3 cache
C<n> times. Subsequent requests will then hit the best case scenario again,
because C<get()> populated the L1 cache.

For example, if your workers make use of L<set()>, L<delete()>, or
L<purge()> anywhere in your application, call C<update()> at the entrance
of your hot code path, before using C<get()>:


    http {
        listen 9000;
    
        location / {
            content_by_lua_block {
                local cache = ... -- retrieve mlcache instance
    
                -- make sure L1 cache is evicted of stale values
                -- before calling get()
                local ok, err = cache:update()
                if not ok then
                    ngx.log(ngx.ERR, "failed to poll eviction events: ", err)
                    -- /!\ we might get stale data from get()
                end
    
                -- L1/L2/L3 lookup (best case: L1)
                local value, err = cache:get("key_1", nil, cb1)
    
                -- L1/L2/L3 lookup (best case: L1)
                local other_value, err = cache:get(key_2", nil, cb2)
    
                -- value and other_value are up-to-date because:
                -- either they were not stale and directly came from L1 (best case scenario)
                -- either they were stale and evicted from L1, and came from L2
                -- either they were not in L1 nor L2, and came from L3 (worst case scenario)
            }
        }
    
        location /delete {
            content_by_lua_block {
                local cache = ... -- retrieve mlcache instance
    
                -- delete some value
                local ok, err = cache:delete("key_1")
                if not ok then
                    ngx.log(ngx.ERR, "failed to delete value from cache: ", err)
                    return ngx.exit(500)
                end
    
                ngx.exit(204)
            }
        }
    
        location /set {
            content_by_lua_block {
                local cache = ... -- retrieve mlcache instance
    
                -- update some value
                local ok, err = cache:set("key_1", nil, 123)
                if not ok then
                    ngx.log(ngx.ERR, "failed to set value in cache: ", err)
                    return ngx.exit(500)
                end
    
                ngx.exit(200)
            }
        }
    }

B<Note:> you B<do not> need to call C<update()> to refresh your workers if
they never call C<set()>,  C<delete()>, or C<purge()>. When workers only rely on
C<get()>, values expire naturally from the L1/L2 caches according to their TTL.

B<Note bis:> this library was built with the intent to use a better solution
for inter-worker communication as soon as one emerges. In future versions of
this library, if an IPC library can avoid the polling approach, so will this
library. C<update()> is only a necessary evil due to today's Nginx/OpenResty
"limitations". You can however use your own IPC library by use of the
C<opts.ipc> option when creating your mlcache instance.




=head1 Resources


In November 2018, this library was presented at OpenResty Con in Hangzhou,
China.

The slides and a recording of the talk (about 40 min long) can be viewed
[here][talk].




=head1 Changelog


See L<CHANGELOG.md|CHANGELOG.md>.




=head1 License


Work licensed under the MIT License.



[lua-resty-lock]: https://github.com/openresty/lua-resty-lock
[lua-resty-lrucache]: https://github.com/openresty/lua-resty-lrucache
[lua_shared_dict]: https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#lua_shared_dict
[talk]: https://www.slideshare.net/ThibaultCharbonnier/layered-caching-in-openresty-openresty-con-2018
