=encoding utf-8

[!L<Build Status|https://secure.travis-ci.org/knyar/nginx-lua-prometheus.svg?branch=master>](http://travis-ci.org/knyar/nginx-lua-prometheus?branch=master)
[!L<Coverage Status|https://coveralls.io/repos/github/knyar/nginx-lua-prometheus/badge.svg?branch=master>](https://coveralls.io/github/knyar/nginx-lua-prometheus?branch=master)


=head1 Prometheus metric library for Nginx


This is a Lua library that can be used with Nginx to keep track of metrics and
expose them on a separate web page to be pulled by
L<Prometheus|https://prometheus.io>.


=head2 Installation


You need to install nginx package with lua support (C<libnginx-mod-http-lua> on
newer Debian versions, or C<nginx-extras> on older ones). The library file,
C<prometheus.lua>, needs to be available in C<LUA_PATH>. If this is the only Lua
library you use, you can just point C<lua_package_path> to the directory with
this git repo checked out (see example below).

OpenResty users will find this library in L<opm|https://opm.openresty.org/>. It
is also available via
L<luarocks|https://luarocks.org/modules/knyar/nginx-lua-prometheus>.


=head2 Quick start guide


To track request latency broken down by server name and request count
broken down by server name and status, add the following to the C<http> section
of C<nginx.conf>:


    lua_shared_dict prometheus_metrics 10M;
    lua_package_path "/path/to/nginx-lua-prometheus/?.lua;;";
    init_worker_by_lua_block {
      prometheus = require("prometheus").init("prometheus_metrics")
      metric_requests = prometheus:counter(
        "nginx_http_requests_total", "Number of HTTP requests", {"host", "status"})
      metric_latency = prometheus:histogram(
        "nginx_http_request_duration_seconds", "HTTP request latency", {"host"})
      metric_connections = prometheus:gauge(
        "nginx_http_connections", "Number of HTTP connections", {"state"})
    }
    log_by_lua_block {
      metric_requests:inc(1, {ngx.var.server_name, ngx.var.status})
      metric_latency:observe(tonumber(ngx.var.request_time), {ngx.var.server_name})
    }

This:

=over


=item *

configures a shared dictionary for your metrics called C<prometheus_metrics>
with a 10MB size limit;

=item *

registers a counter called C<nginx_http_requests_total> with two labels:
C<host> and C<status>;

=item *

registers a histogram called C<nginx_http_request_duration_seconds> with one
label C<host>;

=item *

registers a gauge called C<nginx_http_connections> with one label C<state>;

=item *

on each HTTP request measures its latency, recording it in the histogram and
increments the counter, setting current server name as the C<host> label and
HTTP status code as the C<status> label.


=back

Last step is to configure a separate server that will expose the metrics.
Please make sure to only make it reachable from your Prometheus server:


    server {
      listen 9145;
      allow 192.168.0.0/16;
      deny all;
      location /metrics {
        content_by_lua_block {
          metric_connections:set(ngx.var.connections_reading, {"reading"})
          metric_connections:set(ngx.var.connections_waiting, {"waiting"})
          metric_connections:set(ngx.var.connections_writing, {"writing"})
          prometheus:collect()
        }
      }
    }

Metrics will be available at C<http://your.nginx:9145/metrics>. Note that the
gauge metric in this example contains values obtained from nginx global state,
so they get set immediately before metrics are returned to the client.


=head2 API reference



=head3 init()


B<syntax:> require("prometheus").init(I<dict_name>, [I<options>]])

Initializes the module. This should be called once from the
L<init_worker_by_lua_block|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#init_worker_by_lua_block>
section of nginx configuration.


=over


=item *

C<dict_name> is the name of the nginx shared dictionary which will be used to
store all metrics. Defaults to C<prometheus_metrics> if not specified.

=item *

C<options> is a table of configuration options that can be provided. Accepted
options are:

=over


=item *

C<prefix> (string): metric name prefix. This string will be prepended to
metric names on output.

=item *

C<error_metric_name> (string): Can be used to change the default name of
error metric (see L<Built-in metrics> for details).

=item *

C<sync_interval> (number): sets per-worker counter sync interval in seconds.
This sets the boundary on eventual consistency of counter metrics. Defaults
to 1.


=back


=back

Returns a C<prometheus> object that should be used to register metrics.

Example:

    init_worker_by_lua_block {
      prometheus = require("prometheus").init("prometheus_metrics", {sync_interval=3})
    }


=head3 prometheus:counter()


B<syntax:> prometheus:counter(I<name>, I<description>, I<label_names>)

Registers a counter. Should be called once for each counter from the
[init_worker_by_lua_block](
https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#init_worker_by_lua_block)
section.


=over


=item *

C<name> is the name of the metric.

=item *

C<description> is the text description that will be presented to Prometheus
along with the metric. Optional (pass C<nil> if you still need to define
label names).

=item *

C<label_names> is an array of label names for the metric. Optional.


=back

L<Naming section|https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/> of Prometheus
documentation provides good guidelines on choosing metric and label names.

Returns a C<counter> object that can later be incremented.

Example:

    init_worker_by_lua_block {
      prometheus = require("prometheus").init("prometheus_metrics")
      metric_bytes = prometheus:counter(
        "nginx_http_request_size_bytes", "Total size of incoming requests")
      metric_requests = prometheus:counter(
        "nginx_http_requests_total", "Number of HTTP requests", {"host", "status"})
    }


=head3 prometheus:gauge()


B<syntax:> prometheus:gauge(I<name>, I<description>, I<label_names>)

Registers a gauge. Should be called once for each gauge from the
[init_worker_by_lua_block](
https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#init_worker_by_lua_block)
section.


=over


=item *

C<name> is the name of the metric.

=item *

C<description> is the text description that will be presented to Prometheus
along with the metric. Optional (pass C<nil> if you still need to define
label names).

=item *

C<label_names> is an array of label names for the metric. Optional.


=back

Returns a C<gauge> object that can later be set.

Example:

    init_worker_by_lua_block {
      prometheus = require("prometheus").init("prometheus_metrics")
      metric_connections = prometheus:gauge(
        "nginx_http_connections", "Number of HTTP connections", {"state"})
    }


=head3 prometheus:histogram()


B<syntax:> prometheus:histogram(I<name>, I<description>, I<label_names>,
I<buckets>)

Registers a histogram. Should be called once for each histogram from the
[init_worker_by_lua_block](
https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#init_worker_by_lua_block)
section.


=over


=item *

C<name> is the name of the metric.

=item *

C<description> is the text description. Optional.

=item *

C<label_names> is an array of label names for the metric. Optional.

=item *

C<buckets> is an array of numbers defining bucket boundaries. Optional,
defaults to 20 latency buckets covering a range from 5ms to 10s (in seconds).


=back

Returns a C<histogram> object that can later be used to record samples.

Example:

    init_worker_by_lua_block {
      prometheus = require("prometheus").init("prometheus_metrics")
      metric_latency = prometheus:histogram(
        "nginx_http_request_duration_seconds", "HTTP request latency", {"host"})
      metric_response_sizes = prometheus:histogram(
        "nginx_http_response_size_bytes", "Size of HTTP responses", nil,
        {10,100,1000,10000,100000,1000000})
    }


=head3 prometheus:collect()


B<syntax:> prometheus:collect()

Presents all metrics in a text format compatible with Prometheus. This should be
called in
L<content_by_lua_block|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#content_by_lua_block>
to expose the metrics on a separate HTTP page.

Example:

    location /metrics {
      content_by_lua_block { prometheus:collect() }
      allow 192.168.0.0/16;
      deny all;
    }


=head3 prometheus:metric_data()


B<syntax:> prometheus:metric_data()

Returns metric data as an array of strings.


=head3 counter:inc()


B<syntax:> counter:inc(I<value>, I<label_values>)

Increments a previously registered counter. This is usually called from
L<log_by_lua_block|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#log_by_lua_block>
globally or per server/location.


=over


=item *

C<value> is a value that should be added to the counter. Defaults to 1.

=item *

C<label_values> is an array of label values.


=back

The number of label values should match the number of label names defined when
the counter was registered using C<prometheus:counter()>. No label values should
be provided for counters with no labels. Non-printable characters will be
stripped from label values.

Example:

    log_by_lua_block {
      metric_bytes:inc(tonumber(ngx.var.request_length))
      metric_requests:inc(1, {ngx.var.server_name, ngx.var.status})
    }


=head3 counter:del()


B<syntax:> counter:del(I<label_values>)

Delete a previously registered counter. This is usually called when you don't
need to observe such counter (or a metric with specific label values in this
counter) any more. If this counter has labels, you have to pass C<label_values>
to delete the specific metric of this counter. If you want to delete all the
metrics of a counter with labels, you should call C<Counter:reset()>.


=over


=item *

C<label_values> is an array of label values.


=back

The number of label values should match the number of label names defined when
the counter was registered using C<prometheus:counter()>. No label values should
be provided for counters with no labels. Non-printable characters will be
stripped from label values.

This function will wait for C<sync_interval> before deleting the metric to
allow all workers to sync their counters.


=head3 counter:reset()


B<syntax:> counter:reset()

Delete all metrics for a previously registered counter. If this counter have no
labels, it is just the same as C<Counter:del()> function. If this counter have labels,
it will delete all the metrics with different label values.

This function will wait for C<sync_interval> before deleting the metrics to
allow all workers to sync their counters.


=head3 gauge:set()


B<syntax:> gauge:set(I<value>, I<label_values>)

Sets the current value of a previously registered gauge. This could be called
from L<log_by_lua_block|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#log_by_lua_block>
globally or per server/location to modify a gauge on each request, or from
L<content_by_lua_block|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#content_by_lua_block>
just before C<prometheus::collect()> to return a real-time value.


=over


=item *

C<value> is a value that the gauge should be set to. Required.

=item *

C<label_values> is an array of label values.


=back


=head3 gauge:inc()


B<syntax:> gauge:inc(I<value>, I<label_values>)

Increments or decrements a previously registered gauge. This is usually called
when you want to observe the real-time value of a metric that can both be
increased and decreased.


=over


=item *

C<value> is a value that should be added to the gauge. It could be a negative
value when you need to decrease the value of the gauge. Defaults to 1.

=item *

C<label_values> is an array of label values.


=back

The number of label values should match the number of label names defined when
the gauge was registered using C<prometheus:gauge()>. No label values should
be provided for gauges with no labels. Non-printable characters will be
stripped from label values.


=head3 gauge:del()


B<syntax:> gauge:del(I<label_values>)

Delete a previously registered gauge. This is usually called when you don't
need to observe such gauge (or a metric with specific label values in this
gauge) any more. If this gauge has labels, you have to pass C<label_values>
to delete the specific metric of this gauge. If you want to delete all the
metrics of a gauge with labels, you should call C<Gauge:reset()>.


=over


=item *

C<label_values> is an array of label values.


=back

The number of label values should match the number of label names defined when
the gauge was registered using C<prometheus:gauge()>. No label values should
be provided for gauges with no labels. Non-printable characters will be
stripped from label values.


=head3 gauge:reset()


B<syntax:> gauge:reset()

Delete all metrics for a previously registered gauge. If this gauge have no
labels, it is just the same as C<Gauge:del()> function. If this gauge have labels,
it will delete all the metrics with different label values.


=head3 histogram:observe()


B<syntax:> histogram:observe(I<value>, I<label_values>)

Records a value in a previously registered histogram. Usually called from
L<log_by_lua_block|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#log_by_lua_block>
globally or per server/location.


=over


=item *

C<value> is a value that should be recorded. Required.

=item *

C<label_values> is an array of label values.


=back

Example:

    log_by_lua_block {
      metric_latency:observe(tonumber(ngx.var.request_time), {ngx.var.server_name})
      metric_response_sizes:observe(tonumber(ngx.var.bytes_sent))
    }


=head3 Built-in metrics


The module increments an error metric called C<nginx_metric_errors_total>
(unless another name was configured in L<init()>) if it encounters
an error (for example, when C<lua_shared_dict> becomes full). You might want
to configure an alert on that metric.


=head2 Caveats



=head3 Usage in stream module


For now, there is no way to share a dictionary between HTTP and Stream modules
in Nginx. If you are using this library to collect metrics from stream module,
you will need to configure a separate endpoint to return them. Here's an
example.


    server {
      listen 9145;
      content_by_lua_block {
        local sock = assert(ngx.req.socket(true))
        local data = sock:receive()
        local location = "GET /metrics"
        if string.sub(data, 1, string.len(location)) == location then
          ngx.say("HTTP/1.1 200 OK")
          ngx.say("Content-Type: text/plain")
          ngx.say("")
          ngx.say(table.concat(prometheus:metric_data(), ""))
        else
          ngx.say("HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found")
        end
      }
    }


=head2 Troubleshooting



=head3 Make sure that nginx lua module is enabled


If you experience problems indicating that nginx doesn't know how to interpret
lua scripts, please make sure that [the lua
module](https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module) is enabled. You might
need something like this in your C<nginx.conf>:

    load_module modules/ndk_http_module.so;
    load_module modules/ngx_http_lua_module.so;


=head3 Keep lua code cache enabled


This module expects the
L<lua_code_cache|https://github.com/openresty/lua-nginx-module#lua_code_cache>
option to be C<on> (which is the default).


=head2 Development



=head3 Install dependencies for testing



=over


=item *

C<luarocks install luacheck>

=item *

C<luarocks install luaunit>


=back


=head3 Run tests



=over


=item *

C<luacheck --globals ngx -- prometheus.lua>

=item *

C<lua prometheus_test.lua>

=item *

C<cd integration && ./test.sh> (requires Docker and Go)


=back


=head3 Releasing new version



=over


=item *

update version in the C<dist.ini>

=item *

rename C<.rockspec> file and update version inside it

=item *

commit changes

=item *

create a new Git tag: C<git tag 0.XXXXXXXX && git push origin 0.XXXXXXXX>

=item *

push to luarocks: C<luarocks upload nginx-lua-prometheus-0.20181120-1.rockspec>

=item *

upload to OPM: C<opm build && opm upload>


=back


=head2 Credits



=over


=item *

Created and maintained by Anton Tolchanov (L<@knyar|https://github.com/knyar>)

=item *

Metrix prefix support contributed by david birdsong ([@davidbirdsong](
https://github.com/davidbirdsong))

=item *

Gauge support contributed by Cosmo Petrich ([@cosmopetrich](
https://github.com/cosmopetrich))

=item *

Performance improvements and per-worker counters are contributed by Wangchong
Zhou (L<@fffonion|https://github.com/fffonion>) / [@Kong](
https://github.com/Kong).

=item *

Metric name tracking improvements contributed by Jan Dolinár ([@dolik-rce](
https://github.com/dolik-rce))


=back


=head2 License


Licensed under MIT license.


=head3 Third Party License


Following third party modules are used in this library:


=over


=item *

L<KongE<sol>lua-resty-counter|https://github.com/Kong/lua-resty-counter>


=back

This module is licensed under the Apache 2.0 license.

Copyright (C) 2019, Kong Inc.

All rights reserved.

