=encoding utf-8


=head1 Changelog


This file only calls out major changes. Please see [the list of Git commits](
https://github.com/knyar/nginx-lua-prometheus/commits/master) for the full list
of changes.


=head2 0.20221218



=over


=item *

Added escaping of newline characters in label values (#145).

=item *

Improved detection of LRU evictions (#147, #148).

=item *

Per-worker metric name lookup tables now have a bounded size aimed at preventing
memory leaking in environments with high metric churn (#151).


=back


=head2 0.20220527


Performance optimization aimed at decreasing impact that metric collection has
on other requests (#139).


=head2 0.20220127


Performance optimization of metric collection (#131).


=head2 0.20210206


Bucket label values no longer have leading and trailing zeroes (#119).


=head2 0.20201218


Histogram metrics can now be reset (#112).


=head2 0.20201118


Allow utf8 label values (#110).


=head2 0.20200523



=over


=item *

Scalability improvements that allow tracking a larger number of metrics
without impacting nginx performance (#82).

=item *

Simplified library initialization, moving all of it to C<init_worker_by_lua_block>.

=item *

Error metric name is now configurable (#91).


=back


=head2 0.20200420


This is a significant release that includes counter performance improvements.

B<BREAKING CHANGE>: this release requires additional per-worker initialization
in the C<init_worker_by_lua_block> section of nginx configuration.


=over


=item *

Added support for incrementing and decrementing gauges (#52).

=item *

Added del and reset for gauge and counter metrics (#56).

=item *

Added per-worker lua counters that allow incrementing counter metrics
without locking the dictionary (#75).


=back


=head2 0.20181120


Added stream module support (#42).


=head2 0.20171117


Improved performance of metric collection (#25).


=head2 0.1-20170610


Initial version of the library.
